docs(blog): automating DHIS2 integration tests in JUnit 5 (#66)
dhis2/developer-portal: blog/2022-02-10-automating-dhis2-integration-tests-in-junit-5.md

---
slug: 2022/02/automating-dhis2-integration-tests-in-junit-5

> title: Automating DHIS2 Integration Tests in JUnit 5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Automating tests for DHIS2 integrations with JUnit 5
```

> author: Claude Mamo
> author_url: https://oncodesign.io/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
author: claudemamo
```

tags: [docker, junit, testcontainers, integration, testing, dhis2]
---

> DHIS2 is a platform that can receive and host data from different sources, while it can also share data with other systems and reporting mechanisms. [Integrating with DHIS2](https://dhis2.org/integration), or any integration for that matter, entails manual or automated testing of the integration itself. The growth of container technology, and in particular Docker, has reduced the pain of automating the testing of integrations. By automating, I mean self-contained integration test suites that run out-of-the-box and require no manual set up of their external runtime dependencies ([Docker Engine](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) is assumed to be installed on the machine running the tests). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DHIS2 is a platform that can receive and host data from different sources, while it can also share data with other systems and reporting mechanisms. [Integrating with DHIS2](https://dhis2.org/integration), or building any integration for that matter, requires manual or automated testing of the integration itself. The growth of container technology, and in particular Docker, has reduced the pain of automating the testing of integrations. By automating, I mean self-contained integration test suites that run out-of-the-box and require no manual setup of their external runtime dependencies ([Docker Engine](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) is assumed to be installed on the machine running the tests). 
```

> DHIS2 releases are already published as Docker images to Docker Hub (see how to get a Docker container up and running in our [Getting Started Guide](https://developers.dhis2.org/docs/)). This post demonstrates how a project integrating DHIS2, such as connecting DHIS2 with another data collection tool, can have its tests automated with Docker. The code examples shown are specific to Java 11 and JUnit 5 but can be adapted to many other programming languages and test frameworks. The complete code example is [available on GitHub](https://github.com/dhis2/integration-examples/tree/main/integration-test) for those who want to take a deep dive into the code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DHIS2 releases are already published as Docker images to Docker Hub (see how to get a Docker container up and running in our [Getting Started Guide](https://developers.dhis2.org/docs/)). This post demonstrates how a project integrating with DHIS2, such as connecting DHIS2 with another data collection tool, can have its tests automated with Docker. The code examples shown are specific to Java 11 and JUnit 5 but can be adapted to many other programming languages and test frameworks. The complete code example is [available on GitHub](https://github.com/dhis2/integration-examples/tree/main/integration-test) for those who want to take a deep dive into the code.
```

### Application Under Test

> We began with a brief description of the Java application under test. A bare-bones solution for sharing the aggregate data of the national DHIS2 system with a regional DHIS2 server. In concrete terms, the code synchronises, in one direction, the [data value sets](https://docs.dhis2.org/en/develop/using-the-api/dhis-core-version-master/data.html) between two DHIS2 instances hosting different [organisation units](https://docs.dhis2.org/en/implement/database-design/organisation-units.html):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We begin with a brief description of the Java application under test. A bare-bones solution for sharing the aggregate data of the national DHIS2 system with a regional DHIS2 server. In concrete terms, the code synchronises, in one direction, the [data value sets](https://docs.dhis2.org/en/develop/using-the-api/dhis-core-version-master/data.html) between two DHIS2 instances configured with different [organisation units](https://docs.dhis2.org/en/implement/database-design/organisation-units.html):
```

            .routeParam( "dataSetId", dataSetId )
            .routeParam( "period", period )
            .routeParam( "orgUnitId", sourceOrgUnitId )
            .basicAuth( sourceDhis2ApiUsername, sourceDhis2ApiPassword ).asJson();

        // replace source org unit ID with target org unit ID
        dataValueSets.getBody().getObject().put( "orgUnit", targetOrgUnitId );
        for ( Object dataValue : dataValueSets.getBody().getObject().getJSONArray( "dataValues" ) )
        {
            ((JSONObject) dataValue).put( "orgUnit", targetOrgUnitId );
        }

        // push data value sets to destination DHIS2 instance
        Unirest.post( targetDhis2ApiUrl + "/dataValueSets" )
            .contentType( ContentType.APPLICATION_JSON.toString() )
            .body( dataValueSets.getBody() )
            .basicAuth( targetDhis2ApiUsername, targetDhis2ApiPassword ).asString();
    }
}
```

Note that, before uploading the data value sets, the application swaps out the source organisation unit UIDs with the target ones. The downstream DHIS2 has distinct organisation unit UIDs so it can’t recognise the UIDs from the upstream server.

### Integration Test

> The following sections describe the JUnit integration test covering the application's happy path. For `IntegrationApp` to behave correctly, the test case stands up the source and target DHIS2 instances before proceeding to seeding them with test data. The DHIS2 servers, along with their PostgreSQL databases, are spun up and wired with the help of [Testcontainers](https://www.testcontainers.org/). Testcontainers is a delightful polyglot library that allows you to create referenceable Docker containers from within your test case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following sections describe the JUnit integration test covering the application's happy path. For `IntegrationApp` to behave correctly, the test case stands up the source and target DHIS2 instances before proceeding to seed them with test data. The DHIS2 servers, along with their PostgreSQL databases, are spun up and wired with the help of [Testcontainers](https://www.testcontainers.org/). Testcontainers is a delightful polyglot library that allows you to create referenceable Docker containers from within your test case.
```

* the image-specific [environment parameter](https://developers.dhis2.org/blog/2019/10/dhis2-and-docker/#dhis2-with-pre-populated-postgres-database-using-docker-compose) `WAIT_FOR_DB_CONTAINER` is set so that the DHIS2 container waits until the database port `5432` is reachable before it starts: the database needs to be in a ready state before DHIS2 can initialise.

* `waitingFor` blocks the test runner from executing any further until the DHIS2 server is able to accept HTTP requests.

* the DHIS2 config is sourced from the host `dhis.conf`, located in the Java test classpath:

  ```
  connection.dialect = org.hibernate.dialect.PostgreSQLDialect
  connection.driver_class = org.postgresql.Driver
  connection.url = jdbc:postgresql://db:5432/dhis2
  connection.username = dhis
  connection.password = dhis
  ```

    As shown above, the host's `dhis.conf` addresses the database container by its network alias. Keep in mind that the database port no. 5432 is not reachable from the outside world, but only reachable from within the DHIS2 container, because the Docker network is isolated from the host's network.

#### Data Set Up

> The next step, as part of the test set up, is seeding the DHIS2 instances using the nifty web service testing library [REST Assured](https://rest-assured.io/). REST Assured sends HTTP requests to the DHIS2 web service endpoints defined as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next step, as part of the test setup, is seeding the DHIS2 instances using the nifty web service testing library [REST Assured](https://rest-assured.io/). REST Assured sends HTTP requests to the DHIS2 web service endpoints defined as:
```
